# An Update of Youth Opportunity
### By Lucas, Karen, and Hunter




## Summary of the problem:
* In South King County, there are nearly 19,000 youths, persons between the ages of 16 and 24,  who are neither at school nor are they working. Many of these youths come from impoverished communities, have issues with the law and/or have children that pose serious roadblocks to them finding work or continuing in school. Project Road Map is an initiative designed to help combat this issue by helping youths tackle these problems and help them find employment or schooling. Those that participated in program were 2-3 times more likely to be in school or find meaningful employment than their contemporaries who weren’t able to participate. Despite the overwhelming success of this program, there are nevertheless many youths who slip through the cracks because we, as a society, are unable to to identify who they are. For this project, our group of three looked at pums data from 2017 to see if we could accurately model how the figures given by the Project Road Map one year prior and further see if we could draw any meaningful insights from the data collected. 

## Understanding the Region:
1. The first step in mapping the Opportunity Youth in South King County was to understand the region. We did this by looking through a PostgreSQL database that contained all the PUMAs - public use Microdata area - for the entire United States sorted by state. These pumas also contained additional information such as the cities and counties that they are part of. We began by filtering out all states that weren’t Washington and then filtering for descriptions that contained either the key words “Seattle” or “King County.” From this, we got a list of 16 pumas, 6 of which were clearly part of the Microdata for South King County. These were pumas 11610-11615. 
2. This is also where our first major problem occurred. After combing through the original 2016 report, we couldn’t find any definitive list of what pumas were and weren’t part of South King County. It also became clear that, in the original report, the counties were divided weren’t based on the Pumas but by school districts. This fact will heavily bias our data as either an over or under estimation depending on whether or not we included certain puma counties. We decided to air on the conservative side and use the 6 counties that were clearly identifiable in the map published by the 2016 report.
3. We began our project by downloading the file (“data/raw/tl_2017_53_puma10.shp”) and opening it in geopandas. We then wrote a function that introduced a new color column in the geopandas data frame and assigned it a color based on its puma value. Red was assigned for pumas we determined to be in south king county, green was used for the rest of King county and white was used for the rest of Washington state. We plotted the function in geoplot and had the color parameter equal to the color column.

## Getting the Pumas:
1. After Identifying which pumas corresponded to King County and South King County, we created a new SQL query that search the pums_2017 databased and returned all the individuals who matched the description of youth opportunity. The important values for this were that they were between the ages of 16-24, were currently unemployed and were not in school.
2. After a brief glance of the pums_2017 database, we discovered that there were several hundred and potentially thousand different parameters that were used to describe individuals. We further discovered that each record had a weight value - PWGTP - corresponding to the number of people the row represented. To get the info we needed, we wrote a query that returned the sum of the weights by puma district and filtered the results such that only those who were between the ages of 16-24, were unemployed, and were out of school were returned. The columns corresponding to these attributes were AGEP, ESR, and SCH respectively. 
3. From this info, we created a pandas table listing all the opportunity youth individuals living in each Puma. The link for the data dictionary can be found here : https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/tech_docs/pums/data_dict/PUMS_Data_Dictionary_2017.txt?#  

## Updating the tables/comparing with original.
1. For the next portion, we updated the two tables located on page two of the report. The first table gives an overlay of the number of opportunity youth in the south king county area as a percentage of all the youths in the area. This table breaks the group down into three categories. Whether, they are ‘opportunity youth,’ whether they are ‘working but without a diploma’ or whether they are ‘not opportunity youth.’ These categories are somewhat confusing as they define ‘not opportunity youth' as those who are either working or in school which would make the those ‘working without a diploma’ a subset of the ‘not opportunity youth’ rather than a non overlapping group. 
2. To create this first table, we wrote a unique query that returned summed all the PWGTP weights sorted by age groups and what category they belonged to. We used a CASE WHEN statements to organize the groups into three age groups (16-18, 19-21, and 22-24) and used the WHERE statements to filter the groups based on which of three criteria they satisfied. All this was info was used to form a subquery that was then used to sum the weights of each category. This returned the number of people that belonged in each respective group.
3. After getting the information, we re-formatted the table. The previous table looked the percentage of each age group individually. We thought,however, that this is misleading because it makes it look like each group has more or less equal representation when plotting the data. To combat this, we decided instead to calculate to graph each value as a percentage of the entire group which better represents proportionally who each of these groups are being affected. After this, we created another graph to show how these groups changed within each age group from the original data to the new data.
4. For the second table, we did something similar for the query but added additional filters. We included only youth opportunity individuals and sorted them by education level and age. There were those who had no degree, those who graduated high school, those with a college degree experience and those who had an AA degree or higher. We plotted both the original data and our data collected again in similar way as above. 

## Our analysis:
1. Since we weren’t able to ascertain the exact measurements used in the original data, it was imperative that we normalized the data per 100 people such that 
2. At first glance, it appears that there were no major differences in the number of opportunity youth compared to our data and the data collected in the original report. There did appear to be, however a major increase in the percentage of opportunity youth who had graduated from high school and a drop-off with the number of students who attained an AA or higher degree was also noticed. This could be a classical example of survivors bias and will be discussed further in the conclusion.


## Conclusion:
1. While at first glance, it may seam that the data collected is meaningful - we detected a sharp increase in the number youth opportunities with a degree and a sharpe decrease in the number that are going to college. This trend is actually pretty meaningless because we don’t know whether these increase/decreases are due to changes in the opportunity youths education background or from more/less people qualifying to be opportunity youths because they found employment. The major issue is that we don’t have a constant population source so we can’t make any inferences as to whether the total number of opportunity youths are increasing or decreasing. 
2. The next major issue comes from ambiguity in the original data. There are several instances where the writers of project road map mention a specific region but don’t actually specifically define certain terms. For instance - the term “meaningful work” - is not defined and raises questions of what is meaningful work and how this term may differ from someone who is 16 and working part time after school and someone who is 24 and trying to support a family. Another issue is that the regions are precisely defined and the term “south king county” is used which could potentially include areas as rich as West Seattle and Capitol Hill or could omit Seattle all together.